docs/model_developers/plugins.rst, before:

.. _module-plugins:

Developing Plugins
*********************
Plugins provide :ref:`functions<lang-plugins>` that can be called from the :term:`DSL`. This is the
primary mechanism to interface Python code with the orchestration model at compile time. For Example,
this mechanism is also used for std::template and std::file. In addition to this, Inmanta also registers all
plugins with the template engine (Jinja2) to use as filters.

A plugin is a python function, registered with the platform with the :func:`~inmanta.plugins.plugin`
decorator. This plugin accepts arguments when called from the DSL and can return a value. Both the
arguments and the return value must by annotated with the allowed types from the orchestration model.
Type annotations are provided as a string (Python3 style argument annotation). ``any`` is a special
type that effectively disables type validation.

Through the arguments of the function, the Python code in the plugin can navigate the orchestration
model. The compiler takes care of scheduling the execution at the correct point in the model
evaluation.

A simple plugin that accepts no arguments, prints out "hello world" and returns no value requires
the following code:

.. code-block:: python
    :linenos:

    from inmanta.plugins import plugin

    @plugin
    def hello():
        print("Hello world!")


If the code above is placed in the plugins directory of the example module
(``examples/plugins/__init__.py``) the plugin can be invoked from the orchestration model as
follows:

.. code-block:: inmanta

    import example

    example::hello()

The plugin decorator accepts an argument name. This can be used to change the name of the plugin in
the DSL. This can be used to create plugins that use python reserved names such as ``print`` for example:

.. code-block:: python
    :linenos:

    from inmanta.plugins import plugin

    @plugin("print")
    def printf():
        """
            Prints inmanta
        """
        print("inmanta")


A more complex plugin accepts arguments and returns a value. The following example creates a plugin
that converts a string to uppercase:

.. code-block:: python
    :linenos:

    from inmanta.plugins import plugin

    @plugin
    def upper(value: "string") -> "string":
        return value.upper()


This plugin can be tested with:

.. code-block:: inmanta

    import example

    std::print(example::upper("hello world"))


Argument type annotations are strings that refer to Inmanta primitive types or to entities. If an
entity is passed to a plugin, the python code of the plugin can navigate relations throughout the
orchestration model to access attributes of other entities.

A base exception for plugins is provided in ``inmanta.plugins.PluginException``. Exceptions raised
from a plugin should be of a subtype of this base exception.

.. code-block:: python
    :linenos:

    from inmanta.plugins import plugin, PluginException

    @plugin
    def raise_exception(message: "string"):
        raise PluginException(message)

If your plugin requires external libraries, include a requirements.txt in the module. The libraries
listed in this file are automatically installed by the compiler and agents.

.. todo:: context
.. todo:: new statements

Commit message:

documentation improvements relating to modules v2 (Issue #3535, PR #3669)
# Description

Doc improvements for modules v2

closes #3535

# Self Check:

Strike through any lines that are not applicable (`~~line~~`) then check the box

- [x] Attached issue to pull request
- [x] Changelog entry
- [ ] Type annotations are present
- [ ] Code is clear and sufficiently documented
- [ ] No (preventable) type errors (check using make mypy or make mypy-diff)
- [ ] Sufficient test cases (reproduces the bug/tests the requested feature)
- [ ] Correct, in line with design
- [x] End user documentation is included or an issue is created for end-user documentation (add ref to issue here: )

# Reviewer Checklist:

- [ ] Sufficient test cases (reproduces the bug/tests the requested feature)
- [ ] Code is clear and sufficiently documented
- [ ] Correct, in line with design

docs/model_developers/plugins.rst, after:

.. _module-plugins:

Developing Plugins
*********************
Plugins provide :ref:`functions<lang-plugins>` that can be called from the :term:`DSL`. This is the
primary mechanism to interface Python code with the orchestration model at compile time. For Example,
this mechanism is also used for std::template and std::file. In addition to this, Inmanta also registers all
plugins with the template engine (Jinja2) to use as filters.

A plugin is a python function, registered with the platform with the :func:`~inmanta.plugins.plugin`
decorator. This plugin accepts arguments when called from the DSL and can return a value. Both the
arguments and the return value must by annotated with the allowed types from the orchestration model.
Type annotations are provided as a string (Python3 style argument annotation). ``any`` is a special
type that effectively disables type validation.

Through the arguments of the function, the Python code in the plugin can navigate the orchestration
model. The compiler takes care of scheduling the execution at the correct point in the model
evaluation.

.. note::

    A module's Python code lives in the ``inmanta_plugins.<module_name>`` namespace.

A simple plugin that accepts no arguments, prints out "hello world" and returns no value requires
the following code:

.. code-block:: python
    :linenos:

    from inmanta.plugins import plugin

    @plugin
    def hello():
        print("Hello world!")


If the code above is placed in the plugins directory of the example module
(``examples/plugins/__init__.py``) the plugin can be invoked from the orchestration model as
follows:

.. code-block:: inmanta

    import example

    example::hello()

The plugin decorator accepts an argument name. This can be used to change the name of the plugin in
the DSL. This can be used to create plugins that use python reserved names such as ``print`` for example:

.. code-block:: python
    :linenos:

    from inmanta.plugins import plugin

    @plugin("print")
    def printf():
        """
            Prints inmanta
        """
        print("inmanta")


A more complex plugin accepts arguments and returns a value. The following example creates a plugin
that converts a string to uppercase:

.. code-block:: python
    :linenos:

    from inmanta.plugins import plugin

    @plugin
    def upper(value: "string") -> "string":
        return value.upper()


This plugin can be tested with:

.. code-block:: inmanta

    import example

    std::print(example::upper("hello world"))


Argument type annotations are strings that refer to Inmanta primitive types or to entities. If an
entity is passed to a plugin, the python code of the plugin can navigate relations throughout the
orchestration model to access attributes of other entities.

A base exception for plugins is provided in ``inmanta.plugins.PluginException``. Exceptions raised
from a plugin should be of a subtype of this base exception.

.. code-block:: python
    :linenos:

    from inmanta.plugins import plugin, PluginException

    @plugin
    def raise_exception(message: "string"):
        raise PluginException(message)

If your plugin requires external libraries, add them as dependencies of the module. For more details on how to add dependencies
see :ref:`moddev-module`.

.. todo:: context
.. todo:: new statements
