docs/model_developers/test_plugins.rst, before:

Test plugins
************

Testing the behavior of an Inmanta plugin can be done by using the ``project`` fixture, which is part of the ``pytest-inmanta``
package. This fixture provides functionality to call a plugin directly from a pytest test case.


Install the pytest-inmanta package
==================================

The ``pytest-inmanta`` package can be installed via pip:

.. code-block:: sh

    pip install pytest-inmanta


Writing a test case
===================

Take the following plugin as an example:

.. code-block:: python
    :linenos:

    # <module-name>/plugins/__init__.py

    from inmanta.plugins import plugin

    @plugin
    def hostname(fqdn: "string") -> "string":
        """
            Return the hostname part of the fqdn
        """
        return fqdn.split(".")[0]


A test case, to test this plugin looks like this:

.. code-block:: python
    :linenos:

    # <module-name>/tests/test_hostname.py

    def test_hostname(project):
        host = "test"
        fqdn = f"{host}.something.com"
        assert project.get_plugin_function("hostname")(fqdn) == host


* **Line 3:** Creates a pytest test case, which requires the ``project`` fixture.
* **Line 6:** Calls the function ``project.get_plugin_function(plugin_name: str): FunctionType``, which returns the plugin
  function named ``plugin_name``. As such, this line tests whether ``host`` is returned when the plugin function
  ``hostname`` is called with the parameter ``fqdn``.


For more information see: `pytest-inmanta <https://github.com/inmanta/pytest-inmanta>`_

Commit message:

documentation improvements relating to modules v2 (Issue #3535, PR #3669)
# Description

Doc improvements for modules v2

closes #3535

# Self Check:

Strike through any lines that are not applicable (`~~line~~`) then check the box

- [x] Attached issue to pull request
- [x] Changelog entry
- [ ] Type annotations are present
- [ ] Code is clear and sufficiently documented
- [ ] No (preventable) type errors (check using make mypy or make mypy-diff)
- [ ] Sufficient test cases (reproduces the bug/tests the requested feature)
- [ ] Correct, in line with design
- [x] End user documentation is included or an issue is created for end-user documentation (add ref to issue here: )

# Reviewer Checklist:

- [ ] Sufficient test cases (reproduces the bug/tests the requested feature)
- [ ] Code is clear and sufficiently documented
- [ ] Correct, in line with design

docs/model_developers/test_plugins.rst, after:

Test plugins
************

Testing the behavior of an Inmanta plugin can be done by using the ``project`` fixture, which is part of the ``pytest-inmanta``
package. This fixture provides functionality to call a plugin directly from a pytest test case.


Install the pytest-inmanta package
==================================

The ``pytest-inmanta`` package can be installed via pip:

.. code-block:: sh

    pip install pytest-inmanta


Writing a test case
===================

Take the following plugin as an example:

.. code-block:: python
    :linenos:

    # example_module/plugins/__init__.py

    from inmanta.plugins import plugin

    @plugin
    def hostname(fqdn: "string") -> "string":
        """
            Return the hostname part of the fqdn
        """
        return fqdn.split(".")[0]


A test case, to test this plugin looks like this:

.. code-block:: python
    :linenos:

    # example_module/tests/test_hostname.py

    def test_hostname(project, inmanta_plugins):
        host = "test"
        fqdn = f"{host}.something.com"
        assert inmanta_plugins.example_module.hostname(fqdn) == host


* **Line 3:** Creates a pytest test case, which requires the ``project`` fixture.
* **Line 6:** Uses the ``inmanta_plugins`` fixture to access the ``hostname`` function from the ``example_module``
  module's Python namespace. As such, this line tests whether ``host`` is returned when the plugin function
  ``hostname`` is called with the parameter ``fqdn``.

.. note::
    V2 modules do not need to use the ``inmanta_plugins`` fixture. They can just import from the ``inmanta_plugins`` namespace
    directly at the top of the test file.


For more information see: `pytest-inmanta <https://github.com/inmanta/pytest-inmanta>`_
